JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President Obama leads a meeting
of more than 60 nations come
together to counter violent
extremism and try to dismantle
the Islamic State.
Then, Volkswagen plans a massive
recall of 11 million vehicles.
We talk to a lead researcher
who helped discover that the
company rigged cars to pass
emissions tests.
And a new play ripped from the
headlines. Anna Deavere Smith
explores race and justice
on stage.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH,
Playwright/Actress: We have
retreated into a kind of
segregation.
And some people would say that
it's a all part of this gap
between the rich and the
poor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Afghanistan's
military fought today to take
back a provincial capital, the
first major city captured
by the Taliban in 14 years.
The militants stormed Kunduz
yesterday, in a major setback to
the government. Today,
Afghan troops and militiamen
launched a counteroffensive,
with U.S. air support, and a
promise of more
help from President
Ashraf Ghani in Kabul.
ASHRAF GHANI, President of
Afghanistan (through
translator): Afghan security
force made achievements
today in Kunduz province. They
have recaptured some parts of
the government buildings. New
reinforcements have reached
Kunduz and Baghlan, and a
battalion from the national army
will
get to Kunduz soon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Taliban
disputed those claims of
success, and later reports told
of Taliban fighters attacking
the Kunduz Airport.
In Yemen, medical officials
sharply increased the death toll
from an attack on a wedding
party to 131. They blamed
airstrikes yesterday led by
Saudi Arabia against Shiite
rebels.
The Saudis denied it, and blamed
ground fire from the rebels.
Video of the aftermath showed
collapsed buildings and burned
wreckage, as onlookers gathered.
It was the deadliest incident
yet in Yemen's civil war.
President Obama and Cuba's
President Raul Castro met
privately today on the sidelines
of the U.N. General Assembly in
New York. It's the second time
they have held face-to-face
talks this year, as part of
normalizing ties. Cuba said
Castro pressed again to end the
longstanding U.S. economic
embargo entirely. President
Obama favors that move, but
Republicans
and some Democrats in the
U.S. Congress are opposed.
The U.S. Senate worked today
toward a final vote to avert a
government shutdown. The
temporary
measure would fund federal
operations through December 11.
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell
also called for a long-term deal
to cover the next two fiscal
years.
Meanwhile, House Republicans
were meeting to discuss
strategy. California Congressman
Kevin McCarthy is the favorite
to replace the retiring John
Boehner as speaker.
REP. KEVIN MCCARTHY (R-CA),
House Majority Leader: I'm
concerned about making a
difference
in everybody's lives. We want to
make sure that we're closer to
the people, that they
feel this is their government,
they're in charge and we serve
them. Now, that's not
easy and it won't change
overnight, but that's our
mission.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Boehner resigned
after running afoul of Tea Party
demands to defund Planned
Parenthood, even if it meant
shutting down the government.
For the first time, the head of
Planned Parenthood, Cecile
Richards, faced her Republican
critics
in Congress today. They have
attacked the group after
clandestine videos showed
officials
discussing how fetal tissue
is used for research.
Today, Congressman Jim Jordan
and others sparred with Richards
over stripping the group of
its federal funding.
REP. JIM JORDAN (R), Ohio: The
nice things about these videos,
it's -- it's lifted the
curtain. We can now see what's
going on there. And that's why
should fund the government
and ship the money from this
organization to organizations
that didn't do this kind
of behavior.
CECILE RICHARDS, President,
Planned Parenthood: The
outrageous accusations leveled
against
Planned Parenthood based on
heavily doctored videos are
offensive and categorically
untrue.
I realize, though, that the
facts have never gotten in the
way of these campaigns to block
women from health care that
they need and deserve.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republicans also
accused Planned Parenthood of
spending millions on political
activities. Richards said the
group keeps federal funds
strictly segregated from its
political arm.
The director of national
intelligence told senators today
he doesn't have high hopes
for a new cyber-agreement with
China. It's supposed to prevent
state-sponsored hacking
aimed at businesses. But when
James Clapper was asked today if
he's optimistic it will
work, he said no. He said
economic sanctions might be
better.
And on Wall Street, stocks had a
mixed session, one day after the
big losses. The Dow Jones
industrial average gained 47
points to close near 16050. The
Nasdaq fell 26 points, and
the S&P 500 added two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
more than 60 nations commit to
taking down the Islamic
State; a closer look at Russia's
role in Syria; Anna Deavere
Smith tackles race, justice and
inequality on stage,
plus, much more.
World leaders met today at the
United Nations on ways to combat
violent extremism around
the world, especially
in Syria and Iraq.
"NewsHour"'s chief foreign
affairs correspondent Margaret
Warner is there and has this
report.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: I have repeatedly
said that our approach will
take time. This is
not an easy task.
MARGARET WARNER: Today's
admission came one year after
President Obama formed an
international
coalition against the Islamic
State, with much fanfare here at
the U.N.
The U.S.-led coalition includes
some 60 countries, about two
dozen taking part in the
military
campaign. The president told the
group he is ultimately
optimistic, but the date of
success was unclear.
BARACK OBAMA: We have ISIL
taking root in areas that
already are suffering from
failed
governance, in some cases, in
some cases, civil war or
sectarian strife. And, as a
consequence
of the vacuum that exists in
many of these areas, ISIL has
been able to dig in. They
have shown themselves
to be resilient.
MARGARET WARNER: Indeed, this
map from the Institute for the
Study of War last September
shows the Islamic State's zones
of control in Iraq and Syria. A
similar map this month
shows the group has made
gains in Central Syria.
In Iraq, Islamic State still
holds the major cities of Mosul
and Ramadi, while Kurdish
and Iraqi government forces have
liberated Kirkuk and Tikrit, and
stopped an advance
on the Iraqi Kurdish
capital, Irbil.
So far, Iraqi government plans
to launch new offensives have
come to little. As for Syria,
CBS News now reports the
Pentagon is ending its $500
million program to train
moderate
rebels there. The National
Security Council disputes that
report. But U.S. officials have
said that only a handful of the
trainees ever took to the field.
Kurdish fighters have been
effective in both countries, but
the politics are complicated.
Today, Turkey's prime minister,
a member of the coalition, made
a point of saying the
Turks were also fighting
Turkey's Kurdish rebels
demanding autonomy.
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister: All of us, we must be
vigilant. One terrorist
fighting the other will not
legitimize it. We want our
partners and friends to support
Turkey in its fight against
all types of terrorism.
MARGARET WARNER: For his part,
Iraqi Prime Minister Haider
al-Abadi urged greater support
to build up his military and
shut down recruiting for ISIS.
In fact, there have multiple
reports that the past year has
seen a spike in foreign
recruits to ISIS from
more than 100 countries.
British Prime Minister David
Cameron addressed that.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: So, of course, we have
to win militarily. We have
to have the political solution.
We need all the propaganda I
have spoken about. But we
also need to challenge the
extremist world view right at
the very start.
MARGARET WARNER: That appeal to
beat back extremism was nearly
universal at today's
summit. But consensus on how to
do it remained hard to come by.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
Margaret joins me now.
Margaret, welcome. You are in
New York covering these U.N.
meetings.
That meeting that you reported
on first, the anti-ISIS meeting,
I guess you could call
it, it seemed a little flat in
the video. What struck you?
Well, it looks like we have just
lost our connection with
Margaret Warner. So, unless
we can get it right back, which
it doesn't look like we can, we
are going to turn to
our next segment, which is
talking to two guests about what
is going on in Syria and
the Russian involvement.
And I'm just going to preface
that by saying, as we have been
reporting, last month, Russia
started to beef up its military
support to the regime in Syria.
It started sending supplies
and equipment, even sending
attack aircraft, as this recent
satellite image shows.
So, the question is, what impact
will Russia's intervention in
the Syrian war have, and what
is really motivating
President Putin?
For that we get two views.
Nikolas Gvosdev is professor of
national security studies
at the U.S. Naval War College.
He has written extensively about
Russia. And Andrew Tabler,
he is a senior fellow at the
Program on Arab Politics at the
Washington Institute for Near
East Policy.
Welcome to you both.
Andrew Tabler, to you first. Why
are the Russians doing this? Why
are they getting involved
in Syria?
ANDREW TABLER, Fellow,
Washington Institute for Near
East Policy: The Russians are
getting
involved in Syria because they
want to prop up the Assad
regime.
President Assad only controls
roughly 20 to 25 percent of his
territory. He's been losing
ground, and quite rapidly.
Russia was worried about a
catastrophic collapse of the
regime
that could be taken advantage of
by ISIS. That's why they're
moving in on the surface.
But there are other reason as
well that have to do with
Russia's place in the region.
It's asserting its power. And
also there has been some
speculation that they're trying
to get out of the debacle that
they find themselves in Ukraine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So more about
propping up Assad than about
doing away with ISIS?
ANDREW TABLER: That's right.
It seems, based on their
deployment, whether it's by --
we see significant sea, air
buildup
with significant fighter
aircraft, and augmenting
airfields and naval facility. It
seems they're
there to support Assad in the
western part of the country. The
question remains, will
they play a constructive role
over all of the country, and how
will they deploy vis-a-vis
ISIS?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we
will get into that.
Nick Gvosdev, what exactly is
Russia doing in Syria right now?
What kind of material
and men do they
have on the ground?
NIKOLAS GVOSDEV, U.S. Naval War
College: Well, as Andrew pointed
out, they're putting in
advanced equipment.
They have a number of battalions
arriving. They're putting in --
they're reinforcing
their port in Tartus, outside of
Latakia. They're putting in both
fighter aircraft.
There are reports that
long-range bombers are being
readied in Southern Russia that
could be flown over the Caspian,
over Iranian and Iraqi airspace
and then could conduct
missions in Syria.
And I think that we're seeing
the Russians positioning for two
things. One is of course
to help bolster the Assad
regime, but the other thing is
to prepare a fallback plan,
which is that, if Assad cannot
be restored to control over most
of Syria, the Russians
still want to have a say in how
Syria will evolve in the coming
years.
And one way they can do this is
by ensuring that Assad, the
Alawites, some of the Christian
groups have a secure enclave
along the coast that then could
be used as a bargaining chip
with Turkey and Saudi Arabia and
the other powers for how the
future of Syria would go
about. And it's essentially to
say that Russia, too, has a
voice and a veto in what happens
in the Middle East, and it's not
just simply the regional powers
or the United States that
get to determine the
future of Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Andrew
Tabler, whatever the combination
of reasons for their doing
it, can they be successful?
ANDREW TABLER: It's
very difficult.
The Assad regime is crippled. I
think this is where,
analytically, the United States
and Russia are just very -- in
very, very different places,
Barack Obama not a big fan
of going into Syria, obviously.
Why is he betting on the
opposition? Well, because Assad
controls such little territory,
because he's so rigid in terms
of his political positions,
and because he's been unable to
really turn it around and retake
and capture all of this
territory.
So, the Russians are betting on
a failed scheme, and that's the
way the United States sees
it. We will have to wait and see
if the Russian intervention
changes the calculation and to
what degree.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nick Gvosdev, how
do you see that? Do you think
the Russians have the capacity
to make a difference in
Syria, when nobody else has?
NIKOLAS GVOSDEV: Well, it
depends, as Andrew has already
pointed out, to what you're
trying
to do. If you're trying to
reestablish Assad's control over
all of Syria and to grind all
the opposition group, ISIS, the
non-ISIS groups, into the dust,
so that Assad is left in control
of all of Syria,
that's very difficult.
On the other hand, if the
fallback plan is to start
creating these safe enclaves,
both
for Assad, but also for Russian
interests, so that the Russian
bases on the Mediterranean
are secure, that could be more
doable, because then you don't
have to retake territory. You
simply have to prevent ISIS and
other opposition groups from
expanding further.
And, of course, the Russians
will have a much different set
of rules of engagement when
they -- if and when they
engage in combat in Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
NIKOLAS GVOSDEV: They are much
more prepared to use force.
And what we have already seen
over the last few days, if some
of these reports are to
be credited, that Syrian
government strikes have gotten
more accurate, have gotten
better,
is that a case of Russian
intelligence and Russian
capabilities beginning to aid
the
Syrian regime? We
will have to see.
But if the goal is to keep Assad
in control of the Syria that he
has left, the Russians
are in a better
position to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
right now, Andrew Tabler, about
the U.S. in all this.
How do you envision, if any,
cooperation, collaboration
between the U.S. and Russia?
We know that's what President
Obama and President Putin were
to talk about, and we're going
to come back the Margaret Warner
in a minute about that. Is it --
and is this something
the U.S. should do?
ANDREW TABLER: Well, you know,
on the surface, there's been an
effort to deconflict the two
military activities, which is
that so pilots don't start
shooting at each other, which
would lead both countries to war
over something like Syria.
That's something that nobody
really
wants.
There's some convergence of
concern over things like foreign
fighters, on the breakdown of
Syria and hemorrhaging people
and migrants and so on
elsewhere. The big issue,
though,
is that Russia and the United
States completely differ on an
end state in Syria with the...
JUDY WOODRUFF: On whether
Assad should remain in power?
ANDREW TABLER: Well, yes.
They -- the U.S. believes that
Assad should step aside and has
for four years. Putin and
Russia now say that President
Assad must be the basis for a
settlement, not that his regime
would be a basis for a
settlement. And that's a big
difference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Nick Gvosdev,
how do you see that? I mean, do
you -- what -- how do
you envision cooperation between
the U.S. and Russia? Is this
something the United States
should be even considering?
NIKOLAS GVOSDEV: Well, in my own
opinion on this, a lot depends
on what the ultimate U.S.
goals are.
And, of course, we have sent
very conflicting signals. On one
hand, we appear to say we
want to disengage from the
region. We're reluctant to
really put our own people on the
ground
or to really get involved. On
the other hand, as Andrew has
pointed out, we don't
necessarily
agree with the end state that
the Russians would want. This,
of course, would also certainly
increase Iranian influence in
the region as well, which is
something that our strategy
has worked to try to contain
over the last number of years.
So, in some ways, we have to set
our own priorities first of what
end state we would like and
what we're prepared to do about
it. What's also interesting, of
course, is to see how
other regional powers are
beginning to assess the changed
conditions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
NIKOLAS GVOSDEV: You had Prime
Minister Netanyahu flew to
Moscow. You had President
Erdogan
of Turkey in Moscow this past
Wednesday to have consultations
with President Putin. And
it's clear that the powers of
the region are now also
beginning to reassess what their
strategies are willing to be in
light of the Russian
involvement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot of moving
parts here, all instigated by
the move by the Russians
to get more engaged in Syria.
Nick, Nikolas Gvosdev, Andrew
Tabler, we thank you both.
NIKOLAS GVOSDEV: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with that,
let's turn back to our
correspondent, chief foreign
affairs
correspondent, Margaret Warner,
at the United Nations.
Margaret, apologies. We
lost you a few minutes ago.
We were talking about that
session this morning, the
anti-ISIS session that was held
at the
U.N. How did you
read that meeting?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, Judy, you
had started out asking if it was
flat. I would say definitely
that's an understatement.
I mean, here you had presidents,
prime ministers all around the
table, and talking about, you
know, what they have achieved.
Well, they couldn't say they
have achieved much. Instead,
they bemoaned how much ISIS has
gained ground in their own
countries, either with attacks
or recruiting their young
people. They tried to analyze
the problem. And it had to do
with
Internet recruitment.
But really they said exactly the
same things they said a year
ago. They said -- almost
none could point to a real
accomplishment. Then they didn't
have any frank discussion
about the fault with their own
strategy and what they should
do. They were all canned
speeches.
And, amazingly, they totally
ignored the elephant in the
room, which Andrew and Nick just
talked
about, which is, ISIS is based
in Syria. What are they going to
do about the home base of
ISIS? And that of course gets
into this whole discussion about
Assad's future.
And if the anti-ISIL coalition,
as the White House calls it,
insists, you know, that they're
in the lead, to think they
didn't even discuss this was
astonishing to me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's come
back to the meeting yesterday
between the two -- first
of all, the two speeches of
President Obama and President
Putin, dueling speeches, you
could characterize them, and
then the meeting they had later
in the day. What do we know
about that meeting, and how did
the atmosphere of what happened
yesterday play into today?
MARGARET WARNER: So, you easy,
what we're told -- and it was
still going on when you
and I spoke last night -- is,
they were very businesslike,
frank. They certainly did have
a stony handshake at the
beginning, but that, once they
got in the room, though it was
certainly
not warm and chummy -- these two
men don't like each other --
that there were none of
the recriminations about, oh,
this is your fault and this is
your fault. They got to
business.
Half the discussion was about
Syria and what to do about
Syria. And they agreed on some
common ground. And, of course,
U.S. officials, including John
Kerry, who went on "Morning
Joe" today, tried to point to
the positives: We agree ISIL is
really a serious threat to
all of us, that their returning
foreign fighters are really a
threat to your country and mine
and the whole region and all of
Europe, and that the ultimate
goal, they said, was an
integrated, secular Syria, which
I know many people think is now
illusory.
But they didn't have any meeting
of the minds on this future of
Assad. The one thing they
did agree is that Secretary
Kerry and Foreign Minister
Lavrov will continue discussions
about getting a political
process going, a political
transition going.
And, to me, the big question is,
can this be, as in the Iran
nuclear talks, where the
U.S. and Russia were able to
isolate those talks and really
actually work together to
get that Iranian nuclear deal,
or will it be like the situation
in Ukraine, where it's
so poisoned by the hostility or
dislike or distrust really
between Presidents Obama and
Putin, that it will go nowhere?
And we just don't know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Margaret,
very quickly, finally, where do
you see this anti-ISIS coalition
headed in terms of
what it can get done?
MARGARET WARNER: I think it was
summed up by two people today,
first of all, King Abdullah
of Jordan, who said, if we can't
do -- if we can't work more
effectively, we will all
pay the price.
This was a public meeting. And
late in the day, Josh Earnest,
the White House spokesman,
was briefing reporters on Air
Force One as it headed home,
because they piped it in to
us here, and he basically said
-- acknowledged that, a year
from now, when they come back
to meet here, this issue will
still be at the top of the
agenda suggesting it's going
to be a very, very long slog.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret warning
-- Margaret Warner continuing a
long and productive week...
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
MARGARET WARNER: ... myself.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... covering the
U.N. meetings in New York, we
thank you.
MARGARET WARNER: A pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now the
scandal enveloping Volkswagen.
Today, the company said it would
recall 11 million diesel cars
worldwide, after admitting
they had been rigged to cheat
emissions tests. The company's
stock price continues to
plummet.
Last week, its CEO resigned. And
this week, German prosecutors
said they were considering
criminal charges against him.
William Brangham has more on
the unlikely way it all began.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We take a
closer look at how Volkswagen
got caught, and what it all
means, with one of the engineers
who helped catch the automaker.
John German is a senior fellow
at the International Council on
Clean Transportation, a
nonprofit
dedicated to improving vehicle
emissions and one that provides
research to regulators all
over the world.
So, John German, I wonder if you
would just start off by telling
me, how did this revelation
come about?
JOHN GERMAN, International
Council on Clean Transportation:
Well, we were actually just
doing routine testing.
This is an outgrowth of our work
in Europe. And it's been known
in Europe for five to
10 years that diesel cars have
high in-use NOx emissions.
ICCT has been working with some
other groups to -- on this. We
have done some testing there.
And our director of our European
office, Peter Mock, had the
bright idea that we should test
some vehicles in the U.S. And
our thought was, because the
U.S. has the most stringent
emissions standards in the
world, and because EPA and CARB
have a lot of legal authority
and experience and do effective
enforcement, that the diesel
cars in the U.S. would be
clean, and that we would take
this data back to Europe and
say, hey, they can do it in
the U.S., how come you
can't do it in Europe?
So, we were as surprised as
anybody when we got the results.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, Volkswagen
installed this software that
turned on the emissions
system when the computer was
being tested -- when the car was
being tested, and then
shut it off when the car was out
on the road and a regular driver
was driving it.
Now, I understand there is a
great deal of complexity in the
computer systems in our
cars today, but how does it
know? How did the software know
that it was being tested?
JOHN GERMAN: There's no way for
us to know exactly what V.W.
did, but there's a lot of
potential ways that a computer
can recognize that it's on a
test.
The tests are run in a
laboratory, and the vehicle is
strapped down and run on some
rollers.
So, it's stationary. The rear
wheels don't turn. Well, if it's
a front-wheel drive car,
the non-drive wheels don't turn.
The steering rack never turns,
because the vehicle doesn't
turn. It's bolted down.
The test is always run at the
same temperature. The test is
always run when the engine is
cold at the start. And another
way is that the test, it always
follows a prescribed drive
cycle. So, in other words, the
speed, every second is known.
And the computer can look
for that, too.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Is there a
concern in your mind that this
could be a bigger issue than
just Volkswagen?
JOHN GERMAN: Yes.
The -- there is -- we have no
data, we have no information
that suggests that any other
manufacturer has been doing the
same thing, but it's the right
question to ask, especially
since the U.S. has the best
regulators and the most
stringent standards in the
world.
So, we definitely think that
government agencies worldwide
need to investigate to see if
other
manufacturers are
doing the same thing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In your mind,
is this a sense of the fox
guarding the henhouse? I
mean, I understand that the
complexity of these systems seem
to me to allow the carmakers
to get away with more and more
nefarious activity. I mean, is
that a concern of yours?
JOHN GERMAN: It would be in any
country that doesn't have good
legal authority and enforcement.
As you say, V.W. got away with
this for a while in the U.S.,
but look at the repercussions
once they got caught. And so
it's just -- the sheer magnitude
of the fines and penalties
and public opinion that they
could face, that is the real
deterrent. The agencies just
have
to -- worldwide just have to do
enough to make sure that there
is some chance that they
could get caught.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, are
you confident at all that this,
the blowback from this scandal
will deter other automakers
from trying to cheat like this?
JOHN GERMAN: Absolutely.
And you already have other
manufacturers scrambling to make
sure that they're not accused of
the
same thing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John German,
the International Council on
Clean Transportation, thank you
very much for joining us.
JOHN GERMAN: Right. You're
welcome. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what's driving the high cost of
prescription drugs; and Anna
Deavere Smith tackles race,
justice and inequality on stage.
Philippines
But, first, the television news
and documentary Emmy Awards were
last night. We're proud to
say PBS went home with 17
statues, more than any other
network. The "NewsHour" won two,
the first for an investigative
look at who's behind the Chinese
takeover of the world's
largest pork producer. We
partnered with the Center for
Investigative Reporting.
And the second dives into the
dangerous underwater mines in
the Philippines.
Larry C. Price traveled there to
document the sometimes deadly
way some poor Filipinos
are making a living.
Here's an encore
look at that story.
Hari Sreenivasan narrates our
report, produced in partnership
with the Pulitzer Center on
Crisis Reporting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Near a remote
village in the Eastern
Philippines, at a small camp in
the forest, a man bites down on
a plastic tube, adjusts his mask
and disappears into
water as opaque as
chocolate milk.
Descending as deep as 40 feet,
he breathes from a small diesel-
powered air compressor
on the surface, while blindly
digging into the sides of a
narrow tunnel. For hours at
a time, he fills bags with mud
and rock that a partner hauls to
the surface, where the
sediment is broken down and,
using mercury, panned for gold.
According to Thomson Reuters, in
2012, the Philippines was the
18th largest producer
of gold worldwide. Large
companies are responsible for
much of that, but there are also
unofficial
small-scale mines like these.
Many lie in the poor coastal
province of Camarines Norte,
about 200 miles Southeast of
Manila, where some of the
country's highest concentrations
of the precious
mineral can be found.
But much of it is trapped in ore
underwater. So-called compressor
mining originated in
this region of the Philippines
as far back as the mid-1990s.
The practice was inspired
by fishermen, who used the
motors to dive deep underwater
to catch reef fish. But with
the potential for engine
breakdowns and tunnel collapses,
it's an extremely dangerous
venture,
and one not limited to adults.
Pulitzer Prize-winning
photographer Larry C. Price
traveled to the Philippines for
the
"NewsHour" in November. There,
he spoke with 15-year old Elias
Delima (ph), who began diving
when he was just 13. Delima told
an interpreter that divers get
double the take of the other
miners, around $5 a day, and
that's incentive enough.
QUESTION (through translator):
Why do you do this? Why do you
go into the hole and bring
up the dirt?
BOY (through translator): To get
gold, to help my parents, and to
have some money for
myself.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dindo Leche
(ph), now 25, said he began
diving when he was 14. While
he's no longer afraid, he says
he knows the risks remain.
DINDO LECHE, Philippines
(through translator): It's
dangerous. Because we are
extracting
soil, the holes get wider and
deeper. The soil loses natural
strength. And it doesn't
stick together and easily gives
way. That is what we are on the
lookout for underwater,
so you do not get buried.
QUESTION (through translator):
Which is worse, when the
compressor stops, or when the
tunnel
collapses?
DINDO LECHE (through
translator): A tunnel collapse
is more dangerous. But, often,
those
two happen at the same time.
That is what is called your time
to die.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Compressor
mining was officially outlawed
in the Philippines in 2012. In
January
of that year, near the town of
Paracale, an accident left at
least three compressor miners
dead. The site was shut
down and quickly abandoned.
Yet, with vast stretches of poor
rural communities spread across
some 7,100 islands, desperation
is high and regulation is
lacking. November's record
typhoon caused billions of
dollars
of damage to the country. But it
only stopped operations for one
day in Mambulao Bay, where
more than 400 work on some 40
floating bamboo encampments near
the village of Santa Milagrosa.
Miners here say they pay local
police $11 a month per worker to
look the other way.
Many of those workers are
children and adolescents.
JULIE HALL, World Health
Organization: There are three
main risks from this type of
practice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Julie Hall
works with the World Health
Organization in Manila. She says
that in addition to the
immediate life-threatening
dangers posed by an engine
failure or collapse,
the conditions also pose
longer-term health risks for
children. One is the poor
quality
of air fed to the divers
by the compressor engines.
JULIE HALL: It's likely that
that air that's sucked through
the tube will be mixed with
diesel fumes, with carbon
monoxide, with other pollutants,
because it's very close to the
engine that's driving
the compressor.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The second is
the effects on the body at those
depths underwater.
JULIE HALL: The body's under a
lot of pressure. Little gas
bubbles can form in your
bloodstream,
and those gas bubbles can block
off the blood supply to little
bits of your brain or little
bits of your lung.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And a third is
the poor quality of the water
they're diving in, susceptible
to bacteria and parasites.
JULIE HALL: For somebody to be
spending a lot of time breathing
poor-quality air, under
pressure, under the water, and
exposed to all of these bacteria
and other bugs in that
dirty water, this clearly poses
a significant health risk.
CARLOS CONDE, Human Rights
Watch: When you're a poor
family, the more -- the more
people
you can convince to work and
contribute to the family income,
obviously, the better.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Carlos Conde
works for Human Rights Watch in
the Philippines. He says that
parents are typically the ones
pushing their children into this
dangerous work.
CARLOS CONDE: Oftentimes, they
don't consider, for instance,
education for the kids. Although
getting an education is a
paramount concern for Filipino
families, but, you know,
particularly
in the provinces, the really
poor ones, it's just, you know,
kids are seen as extra hands.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Edlyn Ortiz
(ph) is 12 years old. Girls like
her typically don't dive.
But they help with the panning
and domestic chores that allow
the family to work at the
mine. She tells an interpreter
that her family depends on her
help.
QUESTION (through translator):
Why do you work in gold mining?
GIRL (through translator): To
earn money so we can have
something to eat.
QUESTION (through translator):
What do you like better, going
to school or working?
GIRL (through translator): I
want to keep going to school,
and in the end, that's what
will give us a better life.
LAWRENCE JOHNSON, International
Labor Organization: These
children are mortgaging their
future,
not of themselves only, but also
their families and their
communities.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lawrence
Johnson directs the efforts of
the U.N.'s International Labor
Organization in the Philippines.
He agrees that schooling is key
to breaking this cycle
of child labor.
LAWRENCE JOHNSON: We see
education as a way to help the
next generation become more
productive,
to have a better quality of
life. But it's also right now
allowing for an environment
where these parents can actually
provide for their families, and
not just go out and mine
just enough today to survive.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In a country
with so many desperate
challenges, even before the
typhoon,
Johnson says if people want to
help stop this practice, they
can start by being more
conscientious
consumers.
LAWRENCE JOHNSON: Whether we're
talking gold or silver that we
mine, it's a bulk commodity.
So we ask consumers, are you
sure that the ring you're
wearing, the earring, the
necklaces
are free from child labor?
That's more difficult, but it's
up to consumers to start making
that
choice again.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For now, the
divers will continue to bear the
risks, taking their dangerous
plunges and grasping for gold.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now let's turn to
the rising price of prescription
drugs and outcries to
do something about it.
The latest uproar began after
The New York Times reported how
one company, Turing
Pharmaceuticals,
raised the price of a drug from
$13 a pill to $750. It follows
headlines about the rising
costs of new cancer drugs, as
well as a breakthrough drug for
hepatitis C that initially cost
more
than $80,000 for a
course of treatment.
The two leading Democratic
candidates for president,
Hillary Clinton and Bernie
Sanders,
are proposing big changes,
including lowering patient costs
and bigger discounts for
Medicare.
Now two views on this.
Dr. Peter Bach is the director
of the Center for Health Policy
and Outcomes at Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
And Dr. Thomas Stossel is the
director of translational
medicine
at Brigham and Women's Hospital
and a professor of medicine at
Harvard Medical School.
And, gentlemen, we
welcome you both.
Dr. Bach, I'm going
to start with you.
Why is this happening?
DR. PETER BACH, Director, Center
for Health Policy and Outcomes,
Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center: Well, it's really
that there's no system in place
the hold down drug prices,
and so companies are just
becoming increasingly bold,
charging prices that they think
the
market will bear.
And Turing Pharmaceuticals and
the 55-fold increase in the
price of Daraprim is just
a version of a company testing
the market, if you will, just
how high they can raise
a price. But we see it across
drugs, rapid inflation in the
cost of drugs, not only new
ones, but old ones.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Stossel, how
do you explain it? It's long
been the case that there has
been no system for keeping
prices down. Why now?
DR. THOMAS STOSSEL, Harvard
Medical School: Well, there
still is no system, although
people
are asking for it.
Well, thank you for having me.
So, I have been in medicine for
almost half-a-century, and it's
incredibly better because of the
drugs that are available. So,
drugs bring great value. There's
no question about it.
Also, despite the fact there's
been uptake in costs in recent
years, they still constitute
less than, I think, 14 percent
of total health care costs.
Now, in that 50 years, the
price, the cost of what it takes
to get a drug approved by
the FDA has increased 100 times.
And if you're interested, I can
explain why I think that
is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well...
DR. THOMAS STOSSEL: But it's
that is what is driving -- the
only antidote to keeping
innovation going is to sustain
profitability. Now, the Turing
case is an anomaly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me...
DR. THOMAS STOSSEL: That has
nothing to do with innovation.
That, I agree, is pure
opportunism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right. And we
have reported on that, and we
want to set that aside, because
we could spend the whole time we
have with you talking about it.
But, just quickly, Dr. Bach,
this point that it's innovation,
these companies are taking
a risk, does that explain
it, the rise in costs?
DR. PETER BACH:
Well, yes and no.
It's unbelievably important that
we get new drugs. We need more
new treatments. We have
patients who need help. But it
isn't the case that the rise in
costs tracks with extra burden.
The truth is, more drugs are
being approved now, about 90
percent of new drug applications
to the Food and Drug
Administration. It was only
about 50 percent just eight
years ago.
There are more sort of detours
around the regulatory process,
single-arm trials, skipping
randomized trials, shorter
trials, so it's actually getting
easier to get a drug approved.
The reason is that it is
possible to charge very high
prices.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I want to
turn to both of you because --
on this question of how
badly patients are being hurt.
Dr. Stossel, I read a quote. As
I mentioned, the Democratic
candidates for president are
making a big issue of this.
Bernie Sanders said in one
interview -- he talked about
working-class
women struggling with breast
cancer, not having a lot of
money, they were able to get the
same medicine for one-tenth
the price in Canada.
I mean, real people are being
affected by this, aren't they?
DR. THOMAS STOSSEL: Absolutely.
And I don't discount the misery,
the stress that having,
on top of a bad disease, to
be socked with a big co-pay.
But I see that -- a big mistake
to just point the finger at the
drug companies. I mean,
I have to disagree with Dr. Bach
that it's easier to get a drug
approved today. I think
it's harder to get a drug
approved today, because there is
more stringent FDA regulation,
and it's engrafted on a nasty
fact that biology is tough.
There is a huge failure rate.
Nine out of 10 great drug
candidates don't make it. And
the successes have to
pay for those failures.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it...
(CROSSTALK)
DR. THOMAS STOSSEL: And Canada
controls prices. The whole world
freeloads off of American
drug innovation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you want to
quickly respond to that? Because
I want to ask you both what
you think should be done.
DR. PETER BACH: No, please,
proceed. Go ahead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what do you
think should be done about this?
I mean, we have got the
Democratic candidates for
president both talking about
putting caps
on the price of prescription
drugs. The Republican candidates
take, it's my understanding, a
hands-off, government hands-off
approach. What do you think
should be done, Dr. Bach?
DR. PETER BACH: Well, what we
have is pricing for drugs that
doesn't make any sense. You
can have a drug that doesn't
work well and charge a high
price. You can have a drug
that's
terrific and charge
a high price.
And what I would like to see is
prices based on value. And Dr.
Stossel mentioned that.
And so value is something about
how well the drug works to
alleviate suffering, to prolong
life. And if we had a market
where drugs that worked better
to treat disease cost more,
the companies that would win in
that environment are the ones
who are best at innovating.
And they could get the biggest
profit. And the companies that
make me-too products that
aren't incremental improvements,
they wouldn't be as profitable.
And that's how markets are
supposed to work. And what's
broken here is, right now, both
of those companies can charge
whatever they want.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Stossel, does
that sound like a solution?
DR. THOMAS STOSSEL: No, because
it costs just as much to develop
a marginal drug as a good
drug.
Good intentions don't lead to
drug innovation. There's a huge
amount of luck, serendipity,
that's involved. And so there's
-- I can't think of any
enterprise where there's so
little
connection between what it costs
to develop the product, what the
value of the product
is and what it costs to keep the
system going, keeping the
innovation going.
And it's that huge failure rate
that's the bugaboo here. And I
don't know any easy answer
to it, but I do believe that
it's fantasy to think that, if
you impose top-down pricing,
you bring the political process
into it, that you're -- if
that's what society wants, fine,
but you have to understand that
it is incompatible with
innovation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, gentlemen,
it is a big subject. And I think
we have only begun to
scratch at the surface. I know
we're going to come back to this
again, but I want to
thank both of you
for joining us.
Dr. Thomas Stossel, Dr. Peter
Bach, we thank you both.
DR. PETER BACH:
Thanks very much.
DR. THOMAS STOSSEL: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new play
inspired by today's headlines
touring the country, including a
stop soon in Baltimore.
Jeffrey Brown has the latest
report in our ongoing series on
mass incarceration: Broken
Justice.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH,
Playwright/Actress: You put leg
shackles on a man who could
barely
walk? And then throw him in the
back of a paddy wagon like, oh,
a dead animal, you know
what I'm saying?
JEFFREY BROWN: A story on the
stage taken from the streets of
America today, the arrest
of Freddie Gray in Baltimore
earlier this year, as witnessed
and videotaped by a bystander
named Kevin Moore.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: And you feel
the camera is the only weapon
you have?
KEVIN MOORE, Baltimore: Yes, the
camera is the only thing that we
have to can actually
protect us that's not illegal.
JEFFREY BROWN: The storyteller
is writer and actor Anna Deavere
Smith, who wove Moore's
experience into her new project,
titled "Notes From the Field:
Doing Time in Education."
The project began with an
anecdote a friend told Smith
about a young person in
Baltimore
who was arrested after
urinating on a watercooler.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: She said,
oh, whatever happened to
mischief? And I was just like,
wow, poor kids are pathologized.
And rich kids have mischief. And
it just grabbed me.
And I thought, it's time to go
home, really, and go back to
what I began with, and look
and see what's wrong with it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Home is
Baltimore, where Smith lived
until she was 15.
After the killing of Freddie
Gray and the riots that ensued,
it was a sadly appropriate
setting for Smith her return.
Anna Deavere Smith is a
recognizable presence on
television,
these days on the showtime
program "Nurse Jackie."
But it's her one-woman theater
explorations of aspects of
American life, from racial
strife
to health care, that have earned
her honors and acclaim as a
path-breaking American artist.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: There's
still something wrong with you.
Maybe it's because you speak
Spanish.
Could you tell me what
kind of cancer you have?
(LAUGHTER)
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: I
said, this is appalling.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith plays all
the parts. But the words are
those of people she's
interviewed,
activists, scholars,
politicians, average people
affected by what's going on.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: What I say
now, after having done these
interviews for many, many
years, is that I'm looking for
people who would scream it from
a mountaintop, and I
just happen to be walking by.
JEFFREY BROWN: The aim of this
journalistic-style approach, she
told me recently, is to -- quote
-- "make sense of things."
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: It is, in
terms of looking for the story
and looking for witnesses, the
people who are in it, to have
them explain something to you
that you don't understand.
JEFFREY BROWN: What Smith wants
to understand now is what she
and others call the
school-to-prison
pipeline, in which children,
disproportionately
African-American, Latino and
Native American,
get in trouble in school for
relatively minor offenses and
are then funneled into the
criminal
justice system, changing
their lives forever.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: We have
retreated into a kind of
segregation. And some people
would
say it's all part of this gap
between the rich and the poor
that many, many, many people
are talking about, or the gap
between the rich and the middle
class, or just the failure
of our public institutions.
JEFFREY BROWN: For the project,
Smith and her team talked to
hundreds of people in seven
cities, including Baltimore,
where we joined her for a day.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: The call for
our men to get up. You even go
to the sagging pants,
right, which is controversial,
some people say. What about
that? What about the sagging
pants? What does that mean? Why
did you call for them to
basically pull their pants up?
REV. JAMAL BRYANT, Empowerment
Temple Church: When I say pull
it up, it's not just the pants,
but pull up your level of
thinking, or pull up the
expectation for your own life.
JEFFREY BROWN: We watched as she
interviewed Reverend Jamal
Bryant, who delivered the eulogy
at Freddie Gray's funeral.
REV. JAMAL BRYANT: The reason
why I want you not to cry is
because Freddie's death is not
in vain.
JEFFREY BROWN: He told Smith of
his opposition to a new $30
million jail for youth.
REV. JAMAL BRYANT: Our children
have been so reduced to the
color of criminality, that
they are not even seen in
their humanity as children.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith recently
presented an early version of
"Notes From the Field" at
the Berkeley Repertory Theater
in California, taking on the
personas of some of those she'd
interviewed around the country.
She became India Sledge, a
student in West Baltimore.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: My
boyfriend, Jake, was near -- he
was walking to the store. And
the
police jacked him up and threw
him against the wall for no
reason, checked him for no
reason. And since that time, his
momma's like, I have got to get
away from here, because,
around this area, that's all it
is around here, is just drug
dealers, drug dealers,
drug dealers.
JEFFREY BROWN: As Stephanie
Williams of Philadelphia, Smith
gave a teacher's view of chaos
in the
classroom.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: I felt like
I had a whole bunch of hungry,
starving people, and I had
nothing in my hands to give
them, even though I tried to
give them so much. But it was
hard
to be that strong day in and day
out. It was just -- it felt like
-- it was like running
a jail without a gun.
That's what it was like.
And it's like being in jail
without a gun, no guns, no
handcuffs, billy clubs. I can't
go use a club. I can't do any of
that. I got to just keep you in
order just by being me.
JEFFREY BROWN: In Baltimore, of
course, things were very
personal for Smith.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: I'm just
glad it's not boarded up. It's
different. You know, it's
different.
JEFFREY BROWN: As she visited
her childhood neighborhood on
the city's West Side. A former
neighbor, Sheila Wiggins, who
taught Smith how to dance the
twist, was stunned to see
her.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH:
Oh my goodness.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith showed us
the cemetery behind her house
where she and friends would
play and pick berries.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: We played
in this alley, hopscotch.
JEFFREY BROWN: Today, she sees
enormous problems in her
hometown, but also something
more.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: The young
people in particular who I'm
talking to really show great
vulnerability.
They are not masked with
language or jargon. And I'm very
moved by that. There's a kind
of grace here in
Baltimore that I miss.
JEFFREY BROWN: In this project,
Smith says, she wants to take a
more activist approach
than in the past, pushing local
communities to engage and look
for solutions.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: Right now,
people are just falling off the
radar. They are just
dying. Or how can that continue?
And the only way it's going to
turn around, I think, is
by what I call this spark of a
moral imagination, of a more
empathic community.
And that's one thing art can
offer. I can ask people to feel
about this, until enough
people say -- in their
community, they say, well, we
have got to get this together,
we
have got to turn this around.
JEFFREY BROWN: Anna Deavere
Smith will perform "Notes From
the Field" in California and
Oregon
this fall, before bringing it
to Baltimore in early December.
ANNA DEAVERE SMITH: I said, just
one, Jesus, just one. I'm not
trying to do the masses.
I'm just trying to
save one at a time.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Baltimore,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight on
"Frontline," the first of a
three-part series on the bombing
of Pan Am Flight 103, which
killed 270 people over
Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
In "My Brother's Bomber," Ken
Dornstein, whose brother was
killed in the crash, takes a
deep
look into the files of the case,
talking to former prosecutors
who believe not all of
those responsible were
prosecuted, much less even
identified.
Only one person, Abdel Basset
al-Megrahi, was convicted and
sentenced to life, but was
released in 2009 because of
his deteriorating health.
MAN: President Obama said the
U.S. deeply regrets the decision
and warned Libya not
to give him a hero's welcome.
The Libyans weren't listening.
MAN: Megrahi emerged wearing a
suit, the frail former inmate
unrecognizable as he
acknowledged
the jubilant crowd.
KEN DORNSTEIN, Brother of Pan Am
Flight 103 Victim: I remember
being shocked by Megrahi's
release. His conviction hadn't
been fully satisfying, but at
least it was an answer.
Now all that was coming undone.
My brother and the others had
been killed, and certainty
about who did it was
being wiped away.
MAN: Some believe Megrahi should
go free. They don't believe he
was guilty in the first
place.
MAN: Megrahi is not expected to
live long enough for his next
appeal to be heard.
KEN DORNSTEIN: Megrahi's release
also gave momentum to those who
believed he wasn't guilty
at all, and theories pinning
Lockerbie on Iran were once
again revived.
I wished I could let it go, but,
instead, I decided to set out on
my own search for
answers. I began by tracking
down the FBI agent who had
worked longer than anyone on
the Lockerbie case,
Richard Marquise.
RICHARD MARQUISE, Former FBI
Investigator: How are you? Good
to see you, Ken.
KEN DORNSTEIN: Good to see you.
Almost 25 years later, no one
has ever admitted playing any
role in it. And in fact,
Megrahi,
the one man convicted, he is let
go after serving only eight
years, under a cloud of
suspicion.
RICHARD MARQUISE: Nobody is
being -- nobody is paying for
this. Nobody is paying
judicially
for blowing up Pan Am 103.
That's a great frustration.
Gadhafi was told, if your agents
are found guilty, you have to
admit responsibility for
the attack. And all he would
admit to was "responsibility for
the actions of my agents."
I think it's terrible that we
allowed him to get away with
that statement. When I spoke
to the Lockerbie families, I
said I wished we could have
gotten more for you. Megrahi
was the only person convicted
because he's the only person
that the evidence led to.
But, if he did this, he didn't
do it by himself. Megrahi's the
tip of the iceberg.
JUDY WOODRUFF: "Frontline" airs
tonight on most PBS stations.
And that brings us to our
"NewsHour" Shares of the day,
something that caught our eye
which might be of
interest to you, too.
The John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation announced a
new class of Genius Grant
fellows
today. The winners include an
urban sociologist, an
environmental engineer and
playwright Lin-Manuel
Miranda.
In a foundation video, Miranda
spoke of Hamilton, the Broadway
musical he wrote about founding
father Alexander Hamilton
that opened in August.
LIN-MANUEL MIRANDA, Playwright:
I fall in love for a living. I
write musicals, and musicals
take a long time to write. So,
when you have an idea, you
really have to fall in love with
it.
With Hamilton, it's a perfect
marriage of function and form.
Hip-hop is uniquely suited
to tell his story, growing up
orphaned, penniless. Hip-hop has
the energy of revolution. It has
the energy of struggle. It has
the energy that a story like
Hamilton's demands.
This is a story about America
then told by America now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
videos of other Genius Grant
winners on our Web site.
Also, on the "NewsHour" online
right now, you can conquer the
student debt beast by
saving early and often, says one
Making Sense contributor. You
can find his tips on setting
up college savings plans to help
avoid debt for your children
later on.
Plus, Donald Trump made
headlines with his tax plan. Now
we give you a handy chart that
compares the tax plans of
several GOP candidates. All that
and more is on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later this evening, more
of Charlie Rose's interview with
Russian President Putin.
And that is the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.